At any rate, I left in 69, went out to Great
Southwest Corporation to, I was asked to come out
there and set up a department that didn't exist,
Department of Planning and Design, which I did.
Just take a minute to describe the Great
Southwest. Well, Great Southwest Corporation
was a company that held over 6,000 acres of land,
dead center between Dallas and Fort Worth. Why is
it important? Why is it important to Texas? Why
it's Great Southwest Corp? Well, first of all, it
was probably, to my knowledge, it was the first
really massive development project that was
primarily oriented toward industrial
development at that scale. It also was
significant because in the original people that
were involved in it, you not only had the Wim
family, but you had the Rockefellers, you had
Vincent Ponty, You had Sam Zisman. O'Neal Ford was
out there designing the NS6 flags. And Candela,
the famous structural engineer from Mexico, was
up designing hyperbolic paraboloids,
freestanding. And there was a pulling together, a
coalescing of the talent that I think had not been
seen before on that type of project in this area.
That would be my answer to the question.
At the time that I went out there, the Great
Southwest Corporation had been purchased by Penn
Central, along with Arbita Corporation in
Florida Oh, what was the one I keep trying to forget
in California? Macco. And at any rate, I went out
there and I did do that. And that was my first entry
into real estate development. And then Penn
Central derailed itself in 1970.
And everybody practically left the company. And
when that happened, within the next two months
later, I was employed. by Raymond Asher to work on
the Flower Mound New Town project, and I was
employed to be in charge of planning. I was in
charge of what was called Director of Community
Planning for Flower Mound New Town, which was one
of the Title VII New Towns. Oh, yeah. And that was
6,200 acres of land. If you, near, well, it would be
west of, yeah, west of Louisville between
Interstate 35, between the two Interstate 35s
that merge and go up to Denton from Dallas and Fort
Worth. The other person, major person involved in
that was Edward Marcus of the Neiman Marcus
family. And I did that for about two years. And that
was quite a significant undertaking in in Texas.
It and I think the Woodlands was the only other
Title VII new town. The Woodlands ended up being
much more successful than Flower Mound did
because Flower Mound unfortunately had a problem
of the plan, the way the planning had been done to
get to the approval of HUD. the way in which the
decisions were made, or more accurately, not made
after that time. And it ended up being just an
opportunity that should have been fulfilled and
wasn't. This was another instance where I worked
with Springer. Because Springer represented the
town of Flower Mound as their planter, and I
essentially was the counterpart for Flower Mound
Newtown. So we worked. trying to bring the Flower
Mound New Town
plan and the comprehensive plan for the 22,000
acres, as I recall, that constituted Flower Mound
itself into sync with one another at the same time.
And I should add that the reason why I went into the
real estate development arena was quite simply
because for the same reason that I went from
architecture to planning initially. And that was
that I felt that the, well, in the case of
architecture, that there was a problem as a
consultant in being somewhere in the process, but
having significant things happening on each side
of you that could either distort what you were
doing or preempt the result of what you did. And
that was certainly true in architecture. I found
the problem to be also true in planning with some
additional problems, one of which was that,
number one, people really didn't take planning
very seriously in this part of the country. And
number two, the politicians, many of them were
actually afraid of it. And so therefore, it ended
up being an exercise of planners talking to one
another and recommending things that We're not
really germane to what the political
policymakers thought they were doing. Real
estate development, the reason I went there was
recognizing those problems. I wanted to put
myself in a position where I felt I would be at the
center of decision-making with respect to what
went on the ground and the belief that there was
probably more, at that period of time, more
potential influence for the good in creating
urban or urban-related environments to be in the
private sector, then in a high decision-making
position, then to try to convince people from the
public side that they ought to be doing something
that they didn't understand. I think Vernon and
Mary Lou share that view. Yeah. I think I would...
I'm very satisfied that I made that transition. I
think it's... proven to be true, although I look
around Dallas and some other places and realize
that it certainly is not a panacea for urban
problems.
What is? Nothing. But it certainly is more
personally satisfying. Well, there's a lot to be
said for that.
You know, you asked me the question earlier about
what I thought had been accomplished in Texas with
respect to planning. And I think I answered that,
well, I'm one of those that says you look at the
results and then you just determine whether the
methods were successful or not. And I would say
that from that point of view, I think urban
planning in Texas has been almost, across the
board, unsuccessful. In my view, all you have to do
is, certainly from a comprehensive planning
point of view, if not small sector or project point
of view. We have some examples of project areas and
sectors and things which are certainly
exceptions. But overall, I think one would have to
stretch very far to say that much has been
accomplished, particularly when you look at our
major cities. You look at Houston, which I
consider to be basically unlivable,
uninhabitable. Dallas, fast approaching that.
Fort Worth is still livable. That's only because
the impact of poverty population hasn't hit it as
hard as it has some of the others. Austin is
destroying itself methodically. San Antonio is
doing the same thing. So I think you have to say
that, and I think that one of the reasons for that is
that we have never had any strong mandating type of
leadership at a state level for planning.
Planning in Texas at a state level is a vacuum.
Always has been a vacuum. It runs through counter
to the spouse philosophy of state and the business
interest and the politicians and the lawyers and
you name it. It's counter to all of that. There is no
imperative in Texas at a state level, and
therefore there's no imperative at a local level.
We do not have planning yet, but to my knowledge,
that's effective. except maybe in a few places at
the county level, although it's now, I think the
legislation now exists for counties to plan. For a
long time, they were prohibited from planning or
zoning or anything else. And a few are beginning to
take advantage. I understand Collin County, for
example, is about to start looking hard at a county
plan and zoning and all that, and a few others have.
Even Rouse's County considered a county planner a
couple years ago. But typically what the counties
have done is they've limited all of their activity
if they had any to roadway planning, and that's it,
and intermeshing with the State Highway
Department to try to assure themselves they're
going to get all the funds they want. But I do think
that if I scratch the inside of my head and try to
find one good example, the only one that really
pops to mind is that I think is worth looking at and
worth studying and worth learning from is the, and
there may be others, but this is the one I'm aware
of, is the planning that has occurred in Dallas for
water supply, which was triggered by, as I
understand it, and Marvin, you should talk to
Marvin about this, was triggered by the drought.
And while he was still planning director, and he
may have had some hand in this in 1956 or 57,
something like that, when Dallas was having to
haul in water. It was in very serious straits.
Henry Grazer, who was for many years the head of the
water department, and the city of Dallas mounted a
very, very aggressive planning program to bring a
long-range water supply to the city, which I think
has been very successful and is recognized as
being successful. The city went out and analyzed
what its needs were going to be. They analyzed
where the sources of water could come from, where
they were going to have to make up the shortfall.
And the result of it was that the city went out and
bought large areas of land or got long-term leases
or whatever they did in remote areas from Dallas so
that reservoirs could be built to supplement the
water supply as needed. And these reservoirs have
continued to be built. Dallas is one of a city in the
United States which has relatively modest
rainfall, which is in good shape with respect to
water supply. You were talking a bit ago about
Flower Mound and the problems it had experienced,
some of which were connected with HUD. Yes. Also,
the same thing applied to The Woodlands, they had
problems with HUD getting payments and so forth,
and reviews conducted in a timely way, and so
forth. So there's a basic problem. There was a
basic problem with the Title VII program, in my
opinion. It was the Achilles heel. It was there
from the beginning. And it was not recognized. You
can take for a long, long time, and you can take all
of the problems that existed with respect to
selection criteria and methods of selection for
projects. and say that that was part of the
problem. It certainly was. But the biggest part of
the problem was that you had a program that was
based upon some beautifully crafted
legislation. The incentive to a developer to be in
that program, however, was built around the
part of the program which was going to provide
funds to encourage innovation, new ways of doing
things, whether for cost-effective or social
reasons or physical environmental reasons. But
this was at the center of the legislation.
Unfortunately, as with so many other programs,
the funding never materialized. So what you had
was a number of projects, many of which were badly
conceived, And I worked on another one you don't
know about, but I was a consultant for a while when I
was with Great Southwest Corporation to Floyd
McKissick at Soul City. Is that what it was called?
Yeah. Which was a Title 70 town, which had never
been approved in the first place. It was approved
for all the wrong reasons.
Basically, integration. Yeah, and it was just...
Ridiculous. That's a whole other take. But
anyway, I was a consultant then and made a number of
trips there and wrote reports and did all that. But
there, you could see it there. You could see it at
Sea Riverside. You could see it at the woodlands.
You could see it at Flower Mound. You could see any
number of these projects, Jonathan, wherever.
The funding wasn't there. What happened was that
the landowners and developers Yeah, two
situations happened. You had the well-intended
ones that got sucked into the program, like in
Eddie Marcus in Flower Mound, not understanding
that the funding would not be there to do the
innovation to support all of the things, you know,
that were going to make this town special. And yet
he had to put up with all of the insane bureaucratic
requirements and so forth. And so that was a losing
proposition. The other situation that occurred
quite frequently was you had of people who had
political connections who were trying to unload
essentially bad projects. And they succeeded.
Most of them made a lot of money. But I would put some
of those in the same category as the ISRI 20 condo
scandal in Dallas. And so Flyer Mound, in my
opinion, was doomed from the beginning to ever be
what Ray Nash and Eddie Marcus wanted it to be. We
have two other so-called new towns in Texas who we
haven't talked about. One is the San Antonio new
town. Oh, yes. And the other is Las Colinas. San
Antonio Ranch, is that what you're talking about?
Ranch, yeah. Well, one of the people who was at the
center of Flower Mounds, also at the center of San
Antonio Ranch, Mr. Bob Hanson, And some of the
problems that were created at San Antonio Ranch
and some of the problems at Flower Mound
come from some of the same reasons. As far as Las
Colinas is concerned, Las Colinas may very well
turn out to be the most successful in the long haul
of all of them, mainly because it's
Columbia, Newtown, it's got the force of will of a
strong individual behind it and the financial
wherewithal to pull it off. Who is behind Los
Angeles? Ben Carpenter. That's land that was,
really the core of his land that was owned by the
Carpenter family for years and years and years.
Since it's been expanded, I think it's up around
what, 8,000 acres now? Something, I really don't
know. They've purchased more land. It seems to be
very well regarded. It is, yeah. And there's some
very good things, like the Urban Center is very,
you know, there's some things I would change or not
do if I were doing it, but if you think about the
possible alternative that might have happened
out there, I think one should not spend a lot of time
worrying about what isn't there. And I think Las
Colinas has a lot of potential left in it, and...
But, and I haven't been to the woodlands in a long
time, so I really don't know what's happening out
there. We conduct field trips over there
frequently, because it's fairly close. And it
seems to be going along well. The
villages are filling up, and the commercial
center is operating well. As far as I know, they
don't have financial problems. Well, then the
Woodlands and Las Colinas will probably be our two
best examples. But one of the interesting
questions I ask myself occasionally when I think
about planning development in Texas,
particularly now that the state is in a definite
period of economic crisis, which I do not think is
going to recover from any time soon. But I see this
as the new beginning for Texas, the second coming.
The first one was in 1878 when the Reconstruction
ended. but we're going to have to go through a new
one here you know the question is
who if you look at the the criteria and objectives
of major corporations who either expand in Texas
or want to move from out of Texas into Texas which is
the minority most of our Growth comes from
internal expansion. Who wants to go to Houston?
Who's going to want to live in Houston? Who is going
to want to live in Dallas after a certain point?
Neither one of them have much in the way of
character. Austin, unfortunately, as I said
earlier, is fast destroying its own character. It
was stopped 10 years ago. 10 years ago would have
been a great time, or at least gotten it under
control then. And
again, I guess I'm sounding redundant, but I do not
see anything happening of a positive nature
that's going to really redirect
money and heritage in Texas towards improving and
creating better urban environments that are
going to be really on par with the other ones
nationally that we could talk about. until the
state makes a commitment, and the state gets into
it, and the state starts calling some hard shots.
Well, that's where the authority is. That's where
the authority is. Governmentally, and that's
where the power is. It's got to happen there. Of
course, Haley's book is wonderful on that point,
Land Use and the States. It's one of my favorite
books. Well, I agree that, and I think the chances
of it happening are very, very remote unless we go
through a crisis that shakes, literally, the
foundations of state government. Well, I think
we've seen now that state government has had to
come to grips with the idea that we're inferior,
that we have an inferior situation with respect to
public education. And that is magnified, or
should be magnified, if it isn't in their minds by
the fact that the what's been called the rebirth of
the Northeast Corridor, the resurgence of the
Northeast and some of the northern Midwestern
cities is there because of the underlying
strength that they have, not only in their
industrial base, but in their educational base.
Absolutely. Now, Texas, I think, has been priding
itself over a number of years about its natural
advantages.
Mainly most people, when they said that, were
talking about oil and not thinking about
education or people. It's a rude awakening.
It's going to have to be faced. But I really think
until the state faces up to the fact that it's going
to have to create a climate for investment, which
is going to have to pay attention to not only
education, But all the other things that are
important to companies that are expanding and
people want to live in a place, including what our
cities are like, we're going to find ourselves in
an increasingly disadvantageous position in the
entire nation. And we have so much going for us. We
have a coast. We have mineral resources. We have a
lot of things. surface resources, people
resources, but we're going to lose more of our
people resources. We're going to see, I wouldn't
be surprised to see, over the next 10 years, see a
lot of out-migration of people from Texas to other
places who should stay here to the benefit of the
state, and I wouldn't be surprised to see that
include a number of educators. Oh, I will. I don't
know how A&M can recruit New faculty, when they
can't provide CICLEAP, for example, CICLEAP is no
longer available to faculty unless you're on a
12-month appointment. And normally those go only
to administrators. Well, as the people in my
current industry would say, the real estate
industry would say, well, that's just not
competitive in the market.
Two years ago, I remember... What time are you
supposed to be? Oh, about 6 o'clock. Well, it's now
6.20. Oh, it came on very good. We can delay that
part of the thing. Just taking a look now at this
bill,
you are currently in development. You have always
been in the private sector of planning and
education. Right. and worked with the chapter
here, and so forth, and with the educational
foundation. I was also on the AIP board of
examiners at one time. I forgot about that. Yeah,
you were in charge of the professional
development committee with the chapter. I
forgot, and it's been a long time.
I'm currently doing what I thought I wanted to do 10
years ago, and I manage and am in charge of a real
estate development company. that's based in
Dallas and owned by a Canadian family. We have
significant resources and I can call a lot of
shots. I can make decisions on what we do, where we
do it, when we do it, and how we do it. And that's
something that I would never be able to do if I were
at this stage in my life in Texas in a planning
situation. as a governmental planner? Well, as a
governmental planner or as a consultant.
My experience is that cities don't ordinarily
listen any more to consultants than they do to
their own staff. So I hate to sound so disparaging
about it, but I wish we had some more Marvin
Springers around to fight the battles.
Marvin used to take on the opponents at planning
the way he probably, with the same attitude he had
when he was a tank commander under Patton at the
Battle of the Bulge. And Marvin is, you know, we
don't have any
Marvin Springers that I'm aware of in planning in
public positions in the state of Texas right now. I
don't know whether none have been made in the
intervening period or what's going on, or we're
not attracting them. I do know, I will say that when
the
city of Dallas was looking, after Alden Dale left,
when the city of Dallas back during that period of
time was looking for a planning director, and I
went to AIP conferences and tried to help them drum
up interest, they couldn't get any interest from
them. from what I would consider to be highly
credible people. Part of that, in all fairness,
was tied into the Kennedy assassination
and people saying, who wants to go to a city that
kind of has that atmosphere, which I think was kind
of unfair. But it would be interesting to do a
survey of planning directors and see how many of
them if they were given the opportunity, I mean the
top ones, would come to Texas.
Because most of them probably undoubtedly are
smart enough to realize that without the state
umbrella of support and mandate, that they're in a
very weak position to accomplish much. They're on
their own. And they're on their own with people who
are elected to city councils, for example, and
other elected positions who share the philosophy
or the attitude that created that situation at the
state level. So as you can tell, I'm not overly
optimistic. No. Bill, I want to thank you very much
for the interview. And we'll get this
transcribed, and then I'll give it a pre-edit and
get it back to you for your review and comment.
Fine. Thanks again. Thank you.